[Music]
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of impact theory i am here with lori
gottlieb lori welcome to the show
oh thanks so much so nice to be here
absolutely uh i was blown away by your
book i was moved emotionally deeply i
cannot remember the last book that had
me like that sort of raw and emotional
um and i was very taken by surprise as a
therapist
what why isn't this book more
pedagogical why did you
like really dive into this sort of human
side of everything
yeah so in the book i followed the lives
of four of my patients
and there's a fifth patient that i
follow who's me as i go through
something in life and then go to my own
therapist and i really wanted to tell
stories because i feel like we see
ourselves reflected most clearly through
the lens of other people's stories and
so i feel like you know if someone says
to you you do this or you're like this
or this is the thing that's keeping you
stuck we say i'm not like that i don't
do that but when you read people's
stories you see yourself reflected in
them and then you say oh yeah that's me
there were so i think it's just so much
more powerful
yeah i i would agree with that very much
so and there were two things in the book
that really hit me one you just
mentioned so this notion of getting
unstuck and being there and going
through you as you pull yourself out and
you know begin to change your own
self-narrative and the way that you're
looking at boyfriend and you know
everything that shook down there um and
then the other is death
and
that
was really powerful and we'll get into
that in a second but i want to start
with this notion of getting unstuck so
is that a core like if you
reading the book i felt like that was a
core part of what therapy can help with
is people get very rigid in terms of how
they view themselves the narrative that
they're telling themselves and therapy
is sort of slow about slowly reshaping
that into something more useful
does that feel accurate
yeah absolutely um i did a ted talk
about this recently about how
we're all unreliable narrators so when
people come to therapy they come in they
have a story they're very sure that this
is a very accurate version of the story
but it's a version of the story and
there's so much more to the story and
the reason that they're stuck is because
there's something faulty about their
narrative there's something about their
narrative that they're not able to see
they can't get to the next chapter
they're like stuck in this chapter
and so i feel like my job as a therapist
is almost to be an editor where i help
people to revise the story the faulty
narrative that they came in with so that
they can move forward and if you don't
do that revision you're just going to
keep going in circles and never move
forward
how malleable is our personality like
some of the people that you
um
you catalog in the book especially john
when you first begin talking about him
it's like whoa is this guy really going
to be able to have because he felt like
such an archetype it felt like that
hollywood executive
that we've been told so much about in
countless movies and tv shows and i just
was sort of waiting with baited breath
to see if he was actually going to be
able to make that change so in general
how
malleable do you think our personalities
really are
yeah i mean i think that we're born with
a certain temperament
but i think that there's so much room
for change and that's where people don't
realize how much agency they have over
their own lives they kind of feel like
well this is just how it is or this is
the way i am
but no you're actually making choices
every moment of every day we all make
choices and sometimes we make choices
that don't serve us
and so examples of the kind of choices
people are making
sure uh you know the whole like well you
know we call them help rejecting
complainers right we all know people
like this so the people who are like you
know well yeah i really hate my job but
i can't switch jobs because and every
time you give them a suggestion they're
like yeah i can't do that because this
or that or the other thing right or yeah
i'm not in the right relationship but i
can't you know i can't get out of it
because
or you know whatever it might be um we
make choices all the time about what we
want to do even even things like you
know i really want this or that or the
other thing in my life and so we say
well here are some steps you can take
well i can't do that
right so what is that what is that about
and that that's the stuckness that i'm
talking about
do you confront that head-on like when
somebody walks it so here would be my
temptation as a therapist to be like all
right let me let me just give you sort
of why people come to me they come to me
because they're stuck their narrative is
not working let give me your narrative
let's hear what it is and then we'll
massage it and you know we'll be out in
45 minutes um that very much does not
strike me as the approach that you took
in the book and i'm guessing is not what
you take in your practice
why not and what is the approach
that you take
well i think the first thing is that
when people come in they want something
to change that's why they made that call
usually what they want to change is
someone else or something else and so
they don't realize you know wait a
minute i'm gonna have to do some heavy
lifting here
um and so it's not just like you come to
therapy you download the problem of the
week the therapist says yeah that's
right that was terrible you know these
people are terrible and you leave it's
what is your role in this what is not
working about this how are you
contributing to what's not working and
that's not to say
that there aren't difficult
circumstances of course or difficult
people out in the world that impact
what's going on in this person's life um
i remember when i was training one of my
clinical supervisors said before
diagnosing someone with depression make
sure they aren't surrounded by [__]
right so so it's like yeah you might be
surrounded by [__] in your family or
whatever at work who knows um but then
what is your response and how are you
you know what are you doing with what's
going on do you need to stay in this
relationship do you need to stay in
these relationships can are you
contributing to why this person is being
an [__]
right are you doing something here too
do you have you know the same argument
over and over with your partner
and you think that it's all them because
part of it is you
so that's what happens so when people
come in it's like they want something to
change and we have to help them to see
well what is it that you are willing to
do to change
you've talked about therapy and people's
need for therapy sort of breaking out
ultimately into two buckets and you've
got freedom and change
i'm curious to hear more about that how
are those the things that people get
stuck on and then going back to what we
were just talking about instead of
saying like here tell yourself this
narrative this is going to take you
where you want to go you're always doing
these sort of little nudges trying to
get people to
um
maybe recognize for themselves have the
epiphany and then sort of go off and
change as a result of that epiphany
why do people struggle so much with
change
change is really hard i don't think
people realize how hard it is because
often when they think of change they
think about making positive changes
and so you say to people well obviously
making that change would improve your
life so why is it so hard to do but then
look at new year's resolutions we make
those all the time that's something that
might improve our lives and yet they
don't tend to last and the reason is
because first of all change is hard
because change involves loss
so even though you might be moving to
something better what you do lose is you
lose the familiar you lose your comfort
zone and a lot of us are very worried
about going into a place of uncertainty
a place that we haven't been before so
some of us like sort of human nature
would rather stay in the familiar place
even if the familiar is miserable or
unpleasant
than to say i'm going to risk something
and go to this place that makes me
really uncomfortable they can't tolerate
the discomfort of the uncertainty
and i think another reason that change
is hard is because there's a big
misconception that you make a decision
to change and then you change it doesn't
work like that there's a chapter and
maybe you should talk to someone called
how humans change
and it's about all of the steps that we
take before we even make the change and
so there's pre-contemplation where you
don't even know you're thinking about
making the change there's preparation
where you start preparing to make the
change there's action where you're
actually making the change and then the
most important step
in making change is maintenance the
maintenance phase and the maintenance
phase is once you've made the change how
do you maintain the change that's where
all the new year's resolutions go awry
and what people don't realize about that
is that you're gonna slip back
and what people normally do is the
minute they slip back they think well
that didn't work so i'm just gonna give
up you know like i'm gonna eat better
and then oh look i just had two pieces
of cake so forget it that diet didn't
work right um no it's you have to know
in the maintenance phase that you're
going to slip back and then you just get
right back on track
how do you begin to help people
get more comfortable with the
willingness to change
i think that it has to do with timing
and dosage right so when you talk to
people about change in therapy
when they're telling you something that
they're really upset about and i have in
my mind oh here's what's going on and
here's where they're going to need to
change i'm not going to say that right
away because they're not ready to hear
it
um so i might plant some seeds
and so that's sort of the the timing and
then the dosage is how much you know how
much am i how many seeds am i going to
plant in that one session
and so you know i i have a quote in the
book that
most big transformations come about from
the tiny almost imperceptible steps that
we take along the way
and that's what you're doing in therapy
that someone doesn't necessarily realize
that some change occurred in that
session but by the time they come back
the next week something has shifted
do you have like um
an informal or formal i guess list of
like here are the the sort of
self-realizations that people are going
to need to have um so for instance i
wrote out the when i was trying to teach
my employees how to think in a way that
would allow them to become successful i
wrote the 25 beliefs that i had to adopt
to go from employee to business owner
and and be successful at it and so you
could encounter somebody and be like
okay well i get what they're tripping
over i get which one of these beliefs is
their biggest problem or you know where
we need to start do you have sort of a
rough guideline of how
people need to think about themselves or
how to the elements of a self-narrative
that will allow them to be successful
and sort of begin ticking off the boxes
as we go through therapy
yeah i'd love to hear what those are
that you gave your employees what were
some of them i i have some i'll share
with you
amazing so
the
some of the most important ones are
human potential is nearly limitless
you can do anything you set your mind to
without limitation and then the next one
is that's a lie but it's an empowering
lie and another one is we do that which
moves us towards our goals we don't do
that which moves us away from our goals
and on and on just trying to i'm trying
to get people to believe that the
average human is an adaptation machine
that what we are literally designed to
do is to acquire skills that skills
themselves have utility and so if you
put time and energy into getting skills
you're actually going to get better at
something and you've shown that in your
own life you know with all the different
paths that you've gone down it's pretty
extraordinary how you know you've lived
sort of all these different threads but
pulled them together into i mean your
your work is extraordinary but i think
it's a result of you having gotten
skills in writing and gotten skills as a
therapist and gotten skills as a
storyteller and now you're you know
you're able to bring that together so
that's basically what the beliefs are
are trying to get people to understand
skills have utility and you can gain new
skills
yeah well i mean i think i've always
been interested in story in the human
condition and so i just looked at it
through
different lenses but i think the one
thing that you know when we look at you
know if i could make a list i think what
i would put first on that list is
self-compassion so i think a lot of
people don't realize that you know when
i when i give talks um
and i'll i'll say to people um you know
show of hands who's the person that you
talk to most in the course of your life
um you know is it your is your partner
lots of hands is it your
sibling you know is it your best friend
is it your parents whoever um well the
person that you talk to most is yourself
and what we say to ourselves isn't
always kind or true or helpful
and so we don't even realize that this
voice is there so what happens is we are
holding ourselves back because of this
voice that some that we internalized
from from you know a long time ago
um and so i i had this therapy client
who um she didn't realize how
self-critical she was and so i said i
want you to go home and write down
listen for that voice and write down
everything you say to yourself in the
course of a few days and come back to me
and we'll talk about it and she came
back she was very skeptical and she came
back and she started to read the list
and she said i can't even read these
things too i can't even say them out
loud because i am such a bully to myself
and she had no idea and so when i think
about what helps people to change
it's self-compassion people think that
you need to self-flagellate to move
forward they think like i have to be
really tough on myself or i'm not going
to hold myself accountable well that's
just not true because what happens is
when you self-flagellate you have a lot
of shame
you're basically shaming yourself for
not being good enough but when you have
self-compassion you hold yourself
accountable because you can be kind and
gentle to yourself so that the shame
isn't there and if you can wash away the
shame you can take action if you're
bathed in shame
you're gonna be
so
afraid of everything because you don't
want to be further shamed by this voice
in your head that's going to be like
whipping you right
um and so i think that one thing that i
think is really important early on in
therapy is to make sure that people are
noticing how they talk to themselves
that they're being kind and gentle with
themselves so that they can hold
themselves accountable to make the
changes they need to make
so now the question is how do you
develop that self-compassion what does
that look like is it self-talk
is it
replacing the like you write down the
negative things that you say and replace
each of those with something that's more
affirming and gentle
you know um i had this patient whose
mother would always make her feel
incredibly guilty about every life
choice that she made
and i said to her just because she
sends her guilt doesn't mean you have to
accept delivery
and you know she can keep sending it you
don't have to sign for it um and i think
the same thing is true about that voice
in our heads right so every time you
hear it that doesn't mean that you have
to let it in you don't have to invite
that voice into your head so when you
hear it you can kindly ask the voice to
leave
and you have to be really aware you know
in the beginning it's really an exercise
it's really i need to notice what this
is you know it's just things that we say
to ourselves all day like oh my god
you're so stupid for like something we
did that if a friend did that we would
not think that person is so stupid and
we would certainly never say to them
you're so stupid because you did this
instead of that um you know or just like
we wake up and we look at ourselves in
the mirror we're walking out the door
and we're like god you look terrible
right like
if your friend looked like that you
would not think that your friend looked
terrible so we do it constantly it's
incessant and so the first thing is like
getting that under control
do you um use any of the tools of like
cognitive behavioral therapy to help
people begin that pattern interrupt
yeah i mean i use a really eclectic
approach in my work
most of what i do is kind of in the here
and now which is what is going on right
now in the room with us because in the
room what we're doing is a microcosm of
what goes on out there and so in the
safe space of a therapy room you can do
all the things you can let your freak
flag fly basically you don't even know
you're doing it that's what's so funny
none of us do right we're just acting in
ways in the world and we don't realize
it and so you can really um kind of take
it apart in the therapy room and then go
out there and do something different so
sometimes you know there will be like a
very sort of cognitive sort of cbt-like
exercise that i would give people to do
but i'm not a cbt practitioner
so what are some of the the
homework assignments that you give
people that so we we covered writing
down your negative thoughts what are
some other things you do to help people
either begin to develop self-awareness
or to deploy the tools that you've
taught them
yeah well it's so interesting because i
have a podcast now um it's called dear
therapist
and um i have a co-therapist on it guy
winch and
we have to do in the span of an hour you
know what we would normally do over time
in the therapy room and at the end what
we do is we give people actionable
homework to do
and so we go through a therapy session
with them we give them the homework they
have one week to do the homework and
then they have to report back to us so
there's the accountability they have to
report back to us how it worked out
um and and i think there's something
about
um
having a concrete task to do that will
reframe
what you've been doing because usually
when people come to us whatever they've
been trying has not been working that's
why they come to us so it's very
specific it depends on what the person's
situation is and where we're trying to
get them there's no sort of one size
fits all homework assignment
are there um sort of main groupings so
self-narrative seems like one that's
probably going to come up a lot um
another one you talk about in the book
that i thought was really profound and
speaks to so those two books change in
freedom
you bring up um victor frankl and that
his notion of freedom and i'm not sure
entirely when you said those two buckets
if you were referring to that type of
freedom
what did you mean by that and is is that
something that comes up a lot
yeah so it is it's that you know his his
quote is um between stimulus and
response there is a space in that space
lies our choice in terms of how we
respond and in that choice lies our
freedom um and and i think that's what
i'm talking about is that sometimes
we're so reactive right so like you know
someone says something or does something
we make meaning of it in the moment and
we impulsively react and so if you can
just take a breath
right just take a breath to like give
yourself that space that he's talking
about and in that space
we can choose how do i want to respond
do i want to respond in the way that i
know will lead to
more chaos or do i want to respond in a
way that maybe will lead to something
different it's kind of like especially
you see this in relationships where two
people they're always doing a dance with
each other and you know you can you can
just like if you hear their arguments or
their disagreements
the content might be different but the
underlying way that they argue is
exactly the same so it doesn't really
matter you know you can just change the
content up but it's the same thing
and so if one person changes their dance
steps one person does something
different
then the other person either falls flat
on the dance floor or has to change his
or her steps too
and usually what happens is the person
changes their steps too
and then it's like it's it goes back and
forth so now they've changed their steps
so now you're going to change your steps
and it just it leads to a completely
different way of being but going back to
your question about like other common
homework assignments
um another thing that's really common is
asking people to
perspective take
so often what happens is people are very
invested in their version of their story
and
i will have them write out the other
person's version of the story like if
you could forget you know forget about
your version for a minute like let's
just say your version is valid in the
way that it is and that they have an
equally valid version you don't have to
agree with the points but can you get
into their head imagine
if they were sitting on my couch right
now and telling me their version of the
story what would they say
and that's so eye-opening because so
often we attribute all kinds of motives
and intentions to other people that
actually aren't there
um and so if you could say oh wait the
reason that they did that
might have been this
um you know if you can go from a place
of again compassion
and and really write out their version
of the story you're going to learn a lot
about what you were missing and there's
probably some truth in there and there's
probably also some some place of overlap
where you both actually agree
about something that you didn't even
realize you agreed about when you first
have them do that do you tell them hey
you should be coming from a place of
compassion when you try to teleport
yourself into their shoes
don't just give back all the same things
you've already said from your side try
to to really look at it with warm and
loving eyes like what does that
instruction sound like
well i think it's more about um let's
assume that this person's intentions
were good that this person was acting in
good faith
why do you think they got so upset what
would they say like what would they say
was the problem here what was the thing
that triggered them
um
and once you start doing that you know
you start and we i like a lot of detail
in the story you know it's like the more
detail you put in the more you can kind
of get into their mindset we've actually
done this live on the podcast where you
can hear
um you know an example of someone going
through this perspective taking exercise
and do you find that people
start usually from um
like
that because they're frustrated because
they're upset that in the beginning
they're sort of giving them negative
motivations uh or something that is you
know bad or broken about themselves and
so that person is attacking them for
that thing and that you have to move
them over or is it in the specificity
they cannot sort of help but steer
themselves
to sort of more realistic
um emotions motivations well
i think where people get tripped up in
the exercises at the beginning where
they're trying to defend themselves so
it's it's hard for them to write out the
other person's perspective because every
time they write out well the reason this
person might have done this but then oh
but i had very good reasons for data um
and so they're trying to defend
themselves and so it's it's about
you are that person while you're writing
this if you were sitting on my couch
your homework assignment is pretend
you're that person and then come back
next week as that person
right so you've written out their
perspective and tell me what they would
say
you're not here to defend yourself just
tell me what they would say
you learn a lot
go on you learn a lot just from having
to step in you you learn a lot about
yourself about your assumptions about um
the other person that you didn't you
know you there you get a lot of warm
feelings toward the other person that
you didn't have before um and and i see
this so much in couples when i'm seeing
them in the office
and you know somebody will say
um
you know something like well you know
you never listen to me
and i'll say to that person how well do
you listen to them
right because the other person has the
same exact complaint
and so you see that you actually have a
lot in common usually both people feel
unheard unseen alone
um
misrepresented
right how do you begin to chip away at
that ice i know a lot of what you do is
couples therapy
you know let's say there's like a real
betrayal let's just make this nice and
juicy so they come in there's been real
infidelity and there is just heartbreak
and ice and anger and bitterness how do
you begin one do you tell people hey
like maybe we should just go our
separate ways at this point or do you
sort of always come from a place of this
can be worked through
if you want to work through an
infidelity or a series of infidelities
it's so important that the person who
cheated
is willing to take responsibility and do
the work that's necessary
to repair the relationship and so you
know one of the first things that i want
to find out is is that what the person
wants to do
because if they don't or they're not
willing or able to then no it's not
nothing's going to happen there but
often people are and i've seen so many
relationships um you know where there's
been this betrayal and the trauma of the
betrayal um you know really thrive after
they've done the work and and becomes
these incredibly strong relationships
and marriages i've got to know then
what's the work like how do we because
that's the one thing my wife and i have
always said yo that is a that is a
bridge too far
right
yeah and you know and and i think again
i think that nobody imagines that
they're going to do this or very few
people do let's put it that way you know
most people who cheat say oh my god i it
goes against everything i believe in it
goes against everything that i ever
promised to my partner to myself
um you know most people are not sort of
setting out to do that and there are all
these reasons that they do and so um you
know i think in those cases when people
are really able to examine well what
happened for me why did i do that and
you know to really take responsibility
for what happened understand what
happened so it doesn't happen again so
if i'm taking responsibility for that
i'm just saying hey look i let myself
get into this situation i felt totally
disconnect from you i didn't think you
loved me anymore i didn't think you
wanted no but now you're blind uh you're
blaming the other person right now
that's what i'm trying to figure out
like how do i
you did something it's not about you did
something and you made me cheat right
and and that's the thing where i think
is it makes it really hard to repair
when somebody says like yeah what i did
was wrong but you know what you made me
feel like this but no you didn't you
know nobody made you cheat
you know there are lots of ways to deal
with feeling alone there are lots of
ways to feel with you to deal with
feeling disconnected um you know
cheating shouldn't be one of them
so
um you know so so it's really about
understanding well what else was going
on and usually it has something to do
with maybe how they were feeling in the
now but often it's something about um
how they were how they felt about
themselves in the past and how that came
into the relationship there's a saying
that we marry our unfinished business
and if you
right it's true um
if you don't take care of that
unfinished business you are going to
bring every sort of psychological
obstacle that you came into the marriage
with
into that marriage and is going to get
in the way
and so cheating is often a symptom of
somebody who hasn't dealt with their
unfinished business
oh can we get specific like what what is
example like is close to common and
maybe this is all just it's so unique
everyone's like a snowflake but if
there's any sort of typical patterns um
i'm so curious to know like what
what that thing is that that person then
because like when i was giving you the
example i didn't feel like i was blaming
the other person so
i realized okay that would be sort of
realization number one is like you've
just got to be like where is this coming
from totally within myself
yeah
so i'd love to get an example of
unfinished business that one brings into
a relationship
um unfinished business is somebody's
parent just died and now all of a sudden
they're you know they go and have an
affair um there was something unresolved
in their relationship with their parent
um and now it's sort of like coming out
in you know they're acting out in
whatever way they're acting out
unfinished business is i don't know how
to tolerate um being alone and so when i
feel alone in this relationship i have
to go find it somewhere else because
when i was alone when i was young um
it was it was not that kind of alone
where you're in the house with people
that you know love you and have you in
mind but i felt utterly by myself in the
world and so every time i'm alone i feel
that way here and i'm blaming you for
that but maybe it's something that i'm
carrying with me from my past because i
never learned how to be with myself
how much of this is and and not just
infidelity but how much of like this
like the need for therapy or just your
everyday run-of-the-mill dysfunction
is childhood dependent and how much of
it just it could come anytime
yeah um i see both i mean sometimes
there's something that happens in the
present like there's a big trauma you
know somebody's uh someone close to
somebody dies um you know there's um
there's some kind of loss usually
there's like a big loss in the present
and so people come in for something like
that it might be
um you know the death of a child or the
death of a spouse or
um
you know a miscarriage or you know what
whatever a job loss
right something like that some kind of
loss um
it might be you know usually there's
some kind of way that they're going
through the world that is not working
and that's something that's longer term
that's something that they came in with
and usually that's because they're still
kind of toggling between their childhood
self and their adult self no matter how
old they are
they haven't really let go of
whatever was holding them back in the
past so it's kind of like wearing
clothes that don't fit you anymore and
they don't even realize they're wearing
them they're wearing these childhood
clothes and so and so that stuff just
keeps popping up and so it creates a lot
of
difficulty in all kinds of you know
relationships both professional and
personal
so staying on infidelity for a second so
responsibility that that's you just
because this is
infidelity and death are like the sort
of just earth shaking i can't imagine
how hard it must be to get past either
of those um
so
you've got taken responsibility for
yourself as the person that that cheated
where does forgiveness fall into this
and does it i guess
yeah i love that you asked about
forgiveness because so there's a whole
section in the book about forgiveness
and
um it's about this idea of there's a
there's a mother in the book and she
did not protect her children from their
father when they were young and they
as older adults um now or young adults
now but as older kids don't want to talk
with her they don't want to have
relationship with her and she keeps
wanting their forgiveness
and what i tried to explain to her was
that the more she kept trying to get
their forgiveness
the more resentful they were going to be
that she could be the mother that they
needed now
and see where that relationship goes
without any expectation of their
forgiving what happened in the past and
so what ended up happening was and you
know a little bit of a spoiler but what
ended up happening was that um
three of the children
um decided that that they wanted to have
a relationship with her because she was
able to be the mother that they wanted
now but it didn't erase their pain
and they didn't forgive her they had
compassion maybe for her in a new way
but they didn't forgive her and so we
have this saying force forgiveness
that a lot of people say oh forgive the
person who did x y or z to you and you
will be free
that's not always the case and so it it
really bothers me when people are forced
into this position of you know you have
to forgive when they don't actually feel
forgiveness so when it comes to
infidelity i'm not about you know you
have to forgive the person i think if
anything the person who
who committed the infidelity has to come
to a place of peace with with themselves
right it's not like your partner has to
do this it's sort of like apologies i
think about this a lot when i see people
in therapy where you know who is the
apology for so when you say i'm sorry to
someone are you saying you're sorry
because you'll feel better
about yourself
or are you saying i'm sorry because you
know then you're hoping that they'll
forgive you are you saying i'm sorry
because you truly feel sorry and will it
help the other person
so sometimes you might want to say i'm
sorry but the other person doesn't want
to hear that from you
right
um so the thing about um you know when
we've done something that we regret
doing whether that's infidelity or
something else how do we come to terms
with ourselves and then let the other
person come to terms with you however
they want to
whoo
okay so rita the woman that you're
talking about from the book one of the
most extraordinary stories in the book
absolutely
gut-wrenching when she
is i mean this this is a much older
woman is fascinating in its own right
for you know is your life ever really
over as long as you've got air in your
lungs i mean that's incredible and and
her journey to
being able to reach out without wanting
to be forgiven like got it that but
super powerful
now let's go to a couple that is staying
married
and not forgiving the person who cheated
that seems like a recipe for disaster
from my
uh naive not a therapist mind how does
that work like how can you be with
somebody
that doesn't forgive you like i could
see not forgiving the act and sort of
like setting that on a
shelf to the side somewhere or something
but like oh god i don't think i would
stay in a marriage
if the if i had done something that the
person
couldn't forgive even if rightly so i
just wouldn't want to
be in that stew if that makes sense
yeah i mean i guess that it depends on
how you're defining forgive so i i think
if you're holding a grudge no that's not
going to work so you you need to come to
a new place
vis-a-vis the other person can you
define forgiveness then
yeah i mean i think forgiveness is
saying like you know you gotta get out
of jail free card like
you know like i i forgive you um
i i i'm not
i i'm i'm okay with it you know i'm okay
i've come to a place of sort of peace
with it um
i think you have to come to a place of i
understand it um i understand what
happened with us
i understand that you did a lot of hard
work and you understand more about you i
had to do some work to understand more
about me
but that is always going to be something
painful for that person
and and that doesn't mean that you're
going to lord it over them that doesn't
mean that it's going to come up because
that's not going to work
meaning come up like every time you have
an argument that oh and you did that
thing that really hurt me we call that
you know bringing out the kitchen sink
it's like every time you have an
argument that like you bring out like
every other argument that you've ever
had um
but it's more about hey that was our
marriage then and now we're in a new
marriage
and
you know i i don't think you you know
there are lots of people who say you
know i i don't i don't forgive that but
i'm i'm so in love with this person and
and we both grew and we both created a
new marriage together and we're stronger
than ever
how do people begin to build back that
trust
um through actions
so words really don't mean a lot when it
comes to trust actions over time
and it takes time and so people really
have to be invested if they want to
rebuild after an infidelity
and when you're beginning that process
what like is there and i mean this i
guess could go for anything it doesn't
have to be infidelity but when there's
that real sort of palpable coldness
between two people like so i'm i'm
thinking of in the book john
was an extraordinary journey and i want
to set aside gabe for a second because
that i really want to talk about that
but john just is like the coldness that
had developed or the distance that it
developed between he and his wife um
how like what are the techniques to when
two people truly want to come back
together they've got a shared history
they've got a shared life they've got
the reasons to want to overcome that
how
well i think in john's case you know his
whole thing was and i think a lot of men
feel this way they feel like i have to
be the rock right there's something that
that happens there was a trauma in their
lives
and you know i can't fall apart because
if i fall apart the whole house of cards
will come down
and so um you know and i i i see this so
much you know with with men in my
practice where um you know and and i
think this has to do sort of related to
infidelity too um both men and women
cheat of course um but often i'll see
that men aren't able to speak up
um and and part of it is this
you know the cultural messages that they
get so men will come in and they'll say
to me like you know i've never told
anyone this before
and women will come in and they'll say
i've never told anyone this before
except for my mother my sister my best
friend right so they've told some people
but it feels like they haven't told
anyone so in couples when like let's say
it's a heterosexual couple and the woman
will say to the man like you know i
really want to get to know you i feel
like there's this distance between us i
feel like you don't share your inner
life with me
and so then he does and he starts to
open up and he starts crying
and he starts really crying
and
often she will look at me like deer in
headlights like
i don't know what to do i'm so
uncomfortable with this even though it's
what she asked for it's like i don't
feel safe when you don't open up to me
and i don't feel safe when you open up
too much to me when you start crying you
know and and i start to feel unsafe it's
like goldilocks it's like not too much
not too you know like like not too
little like there's just sort of this
right amount of
of emotion
that a man can share
and so i i hope that that's changing in
our culture because i think both men and
women would be much happier
if we could all walk the walk which is
um you know if you say you want men to
be vulnerable give them the space to be
vulnerable where do you think we bump up
against um
nature on that one and i i am well aware
that trying to tease out nature and
nurture is
you know in any sort of delineated
perfect line is is impossible um but
i i will say i believe and i'd be very
curious to hear what you think that
so science
points that we are roughly 50 hardwired
and 50 malleable and if that's true i
would say that certainly some of that
hardwiring has to do with our sex and
like when you tell the story that um you
know guys will say oh i've never told
anybody this and girls are like oh i've
never told anybody but
like
i don't i don't feel and i could be
totally wrong i'm willing to accept that
i don't feel like i'm i feel that way no
one ever told me not to cry in fact my
mom always encouraged it um but i would
there are many things that like anxiety
for instance it took me so long to tell
my wife that i felt anxious
and
some of that for sure is like i wanted
to be tough but also like when i say
when i got around guys that that were
tough for the first time in my life i
took to that like a fish to water like
i've been waiting for it my whole life
like there was something that spoke to
me in a way that being you know very
well raised i would say by my mother
to be open and vulnerable and all that
it didn't have that like glowing orb of
resonance that it had when i finally got
around guys that were a little bit more
rough and tumble
and
that like where the
where the sexes begin to differ seems
important enough at least
as a person to reflect on yourself like
where what lane would i feel more
comfortable in and so i'm curious like
how that plays out if you think that
there really is like in this particular
example i've heard you talk about this
before and i'm so glad you brought it up
now i'm so curious to to get your answer
on whether you think like there is just
a certain amount of like
women will
have some kind of reaction if the guy
doesn't have a certain amount of
stoicism nobody wants to be dating a
rock but like a certain amount of
stoicism like if somebody rolled up and
was physically threatening that the guy
isn't going to crumble
yeah i mean i think these are these are
sort of like cultural
expectations
that we have with no biological
imperative
oh i don't know i don't know but i can
but i can tell you that when men do come
in my office and they do open up the the
kinds of things that they think about
that they worry about that they feel are
very similar to the kind of things that
women think about and worry about and
feel
you know what does it mean to
you know what does it mean to be loved
what does it mean to love
what does it mean to be accepted um what
does it mean to be a good parent what
does it mean to be a good
you know son or daughter right um
people have the same concerns about life
you know what does it mean to
to succeed
all of those questions
um what does it mean to be a good friend
so i i think we just don't give men the
space to talk about some of these things
i'm not saying that men and women are
are wired exactly the same thing they're
exactly alike but i will say that
there's so much more commonality
and that when people can
be open to that commonality i think that
the relationships are much richer
i wish that we had seven hours there are
so many things to to go down with you
one thing i would stab myself in the
face if we didn't have plenty
plenty of time to talk about is gabe
trauma
tell people the the john and gabe what
their relationship was and how it came
out and then i was going to ask if you
saw it coming
yeah so um so not to create a whole
spoiler in the book but um for those
people who haven't read it but uh john
is this person who when i first meet him
he is incredibly successful in his work
he works in hollywood and
uh he
he's very unlikable he's very abrasive
he thinks he's better than everybody
else um he's having trouble sleeping
he's having trouble with his wife
and uh he kind of feels like everybody
is an idiot and he knows better and um
and and i you know people said to me
like why would you treat him why would
you see this person when he was so
insulting to you from day one
and it's because i think that people's
behavior speaks the unspeakable
and he definitely you know when you talk
about gabe that was the unspeakable so
there was something that had happened in
his life that he had talked to nobody
about
and he also had some sort of stuff from
his childhood you know that that you
know he lost his mother when when he was
young
and um and so it was really about just
you know i knew i was gonna have to
figure out what was what was the source
of his pain because people act a certain
way because they have to keep you at a
distance so that you can't see their
pain
so if he could keep everybody at bay
with his obnoxious behavior then nobody
could get close to him and nobody could
see his pain
and you know when i found out what it
was and it was it was you know i i
wasn't expecting what it was um you know
it was
it was really traumatic for him and um
and he'd been carrying this around
for years
and he talked to nobody about it because
he felt like
he had to be the strong person in the
family he had to be the person who
couldn't you know what he called it
falling apart right um
and and what he came to learn was that
it actually weakens people so when you
when you think you're being strong by
pushing down your feelings you're
actually you know your psychological
immune system is like in overload
and
you're you become incredibly
shut down and you can't really live
you're like alive but dead you're alive
you're going through the motions but
you're not living at all
and so it was once he was able to
feel the pain
and experience the pain and share that
um he was able to live again and so it's
like sort of you know counterintuitive
we think oh i i will die if i feel this
kind of pain no you will die if you
don't feel this kind of pain
yeah that was
so well articulated in the book and lori
i have to imagine people lavish you with
praise for how well the book is written
because the book is written freakishly
well
the way that you interweave the stories
um i i was truly moved and for people
that
watch my podcast that they will sense my
sincerity to my toes um it was just
handled so so well with the way that
you're sort of parallel tracking the
different lessons and how
what you needed to learn in therapy is
tied to the people that you're being a
therapist for and like the way that the
the different realizations begin to
unlock things in your life and their
life and oh man it was just absolutely
crazy and
like trump childhood and trauma freak me
out childhood freaks me out because i
don't like that you can't undo something
that there's this magical period in your
childhood and if that's [__] up like
hey sorry it's just like you're in
trouble for the rest of your life well
no so i have a really different view of
that so i think that a lot of people
yeah well yes because that was such a
grim view of life um you know some
people feel like they get into young
adulthood and they feel like they want
to redo they want to redo on their
childhoods and you can't move forward
until you accept the fact that you don't
get to get you don't get a redo on your
childhood
and if you can live with that loss right
i don't get a redo on my childhood but
here's what i get i get the freedom
of adulthood
and you will not be free in adulthood if
you are holding on to this hope for a
better past you cannot move forward to a
better future if you are holding on to
the hope for a better past
so
that's the work of therapy the work of
therapy is you're not going to get a
redo
how do we deal with that loss
and then how do you use the freedom that
you have now to create the kind of
present and future that you want that
you didn't get to have
so how do you deal with that loss do you
just have people reframe it is it
focusing them on what they could have if
they were willing to let go is letting
go the right word like what is that well
i think there's this fantasy there's
this fantasy of you know if my past had
been this way then everything would have
worked out perfectly
and i think it's helping people to see a
more balanced view of their lives um and
i think it's also to help them see the
you know what they have learned from the
experiences that they've had so they can
integrate that experience into their
lives so
you know when we talk about moving
forward from the past we're not talking
about um you know forgetting it happened
or pretending it didn't happen or saying
i don't feel pain around that because
you will
but it's more about how do i integrate
that experience into my life so that i
don't compartmentalize it and comes out
in all these unconscious ways that where
i self-sabotage left and right because
that's what people do when they're not
integrating the experience into their
lives they self-sabotage in all kinds of
ways but how do i integrate that into
the experience of my life so that i can
make some kind of peace with it
even though it will be painful and then
move forward so that i can taste the
freedom that i never had
thank you so much for coming on the show
when where can people
find out more about you you've got so
much going on
oh well first of all i'm so glad the
book resonated with you in that way um
you know so many people have talked
about how
even though their situations might not
look anything like the people in the
book and that's why i picked those
people specifically because it seems
like all five of us are so different
from one another and maybe even from the
reader but we can all see ourselves in
every single one of those five
um so people can get the book anywhere
they get their books um you know
independent bookstores amazon barnes
noble wherever
and people can watch my ted talk
at ted.com they can
listen to the new podcast called dear
therapists
on apple podcasts or anywhere they get
their podcasts
they can read my weekly atlantic column
dear therapist
and they can follow me on instagram
twitter um
you know wherever they feel like uh
catching up with what i'm up to
very cool
well thank you again lori so much for
coming on the show it's amazing i will
definitely continue drinking deeply of
your world i think it's really really
extraordinary
i look forward to seeing what you do
next and speaking of things that are
next boys and girls if you haven't
already be sure to subscribe and until
next time my friends be legendary take
care
the word dharma means a lot of things
and it's always hard to translate
ancient sanskrit words into modern day
english but the closest two definitions
are your true nature
and your eternal purpose